The communication typically happens between
a client and a server sometimes called the service provider.
The client makes a request for data or
information and the server responds to that request.
The means of communication between the two systems is via
a standard web protocol like HTTP or HTTPS over the worldwide web,
and it uses a common language or message format like JSON or XML.
Message formats are like different languages; English,
Portuguese, Italian, et cetera,
that allows systems to talk to each other.
Humans speak English or Portuguese or Italian while computers speak XML or JSON.
Web services can provide data in a number of
different formats but XML and JSON are the most common.
Extensible Markup Language or XML has long been
a popular way to structure data using a familiar markup language.
JavaScript Object Notation or JSON is
a text-based data interchange format derived from the JavaScript scripting language.
It is formatted as key value pairs and is more lightweight than XML.
A client invokes a web service by sending an XML or JSON message,
then waits for a corresponding XML response from the server.
How does it work? The first step,
the web service provider,
the person who created the web service defines
a standard format for requests and also for the response provided.
Next, the client makes a request of the web service across the network.
Lastly, the web service receives that request and performs an action like
querie database or perform a calculation and sends a response back to the calling client.